feat (curriculum): add oop and encapsulation lectures (#62121)
freeCodeCamp/freeCodeCamp: curriculum/challenges/english/blocks/lecture-understanding-object-oriented-programming-and-encapsulation/68c3bc80f67363a31791fe1c.md

---
id: 68c3bc80f67363a31791fe1c
title: What Is Abstraction and How Does It Help Keep Complex Systems Organized?
challengeType: 19
dashedName: what-is-abstraction-and-how-does-it-help-keep-complex-systems-organized
---

# --description--

Now that we've looked at encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism, let's discuss the next key concept of object-oriented programming – abstraction.

Abstraction is the process of hiding complex implementation details and showing only the essential features of an object or system. Think of it as focusing on what something does rather than how it does it.

Abstraction is not limited to Python. It's a programming concept that can be implemented in many languages that support object-oriented programming.

> To illustrate abstraction, imagine you're driving a car. When you’re in the driver’s seat, you interact with essential parts like the steering wheel, shifter, and the accelerator and brake pedals. You don't need to know the intricate details of how engine works, how the transmission shifts gears, or the physics behind the braking system, as all of those are the complex implementation details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate abstraction, imagine you're driving a car. When you're in the driver's seat, you interact with essential parts like the steering wheel, shifter, and the accelerator and brake pedals. You don't need to know the intricate details of how engine works, how the transmission shifts gears, or the physics behind the braking system, as all of those are the complex implementation details.
```

That's an abstraction at work! It provides you with a simplified interface to interact with a complex system.

In the case of a car again, the simplified interface is the steering wheel, brakes, and accelerator, while the complex system is the car itself.

As for how Python implements abstraction, it does so through the `abc` module.

This module provides the `ABC` class (standing for “abstract base class”) and the  `@abstractmethod` decorator.

`ABC` is the class that is meant to be inherited from, but you cannot create direct objects from it. It is what defines a common interface of methods and properties that its subclasses must implement.

On the other hand, an abstract method is a method declared in an Abstract Base Class (ABC) using the `@abstractmethod` decorator. It may have no implementation or a basic default one. However, any subclass must override it to be considered concrete and instantiable, even if a default implementation is provided.

> Here’s the basic syntax of abstract class in Python:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's the basic syntax of abstract class in Python:
```

       print('Meow!')

# Another concrete class that will override the abstract method
class Monkey(Animal):
   def make_sound(self):
       print('Ooh ooh aah aah!')

# Create instances of each concrete class
animals = [Dog(), Cat(), Monkey()]

# Loop through the instances to call the make_sound method
for animal in animals:
   animal.make_sound()

# Output:
# Woof!
# Meow!
# Ooh ooh aah aah!
```

In this example:

- We are importing the `ABC` class and `abstractmethod` from the `abc` module.
- We then create an `Animal` class that inherits from `ABC`, and create an abstract method `make_sound` in it that each subclass of `Animal` must override.
- We create the concrete classes `Dog`, `Cat`, and `Monkey`, which must override the `make_sound` abstract method.
- We instantiate the concrete classes and call their `make_sound` method to show how each of them implements the `make_sound` abstract method in its own way.

Remember that you cannot create an instance of the Animal class. Here's what happens if you try to do that:

```py
dog = Animal() 
# TypeError: Can't instantiate abstract class Animal 
# without an implementation for abstract method 'make_sound'
```

> The same rule applies to subclasses that don’t provide an implementation for the abstract method. Even if you define a subclass of Animal, you can’t instantiate it until it overrides make_sound. Here’s an example showing that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same rule applies to subclasses that don't provide an implementation for the abstract method. Even if you define a subclass of Animal, you can't instantiate it until it overrides make_sound. Here's an example showing that:
```
